Hello friends
In this video we are going to learn the relationship
between 2D array and pointers
Let us take an example of three by three 2 dimensional
array.
The base address of this array arr is 1000 and its
memory address is an arithmetic progression with common difference of
four
As this is an integer array and size of an integer
is 4. Here
address of array, that is &arr is a pointer
to the whole 2D array
Here it is a three by three array.
So &arr is a pointer to the whole three by
three array and we can denote &arr
as a pointer of type (int*)[3][3]
It simply says
&arr is a pointer to a three by three
integer array. So the base address of the 2D array
is 1000
So &arr value will be 1000 and what will
be the value of &arr+1? If we
move a single integer pointer
It will point to the next variable's memory address. But
here &arr points the whole 3 by 3
2D array
So if we move &arr by one
position that is
&arr+1
It will point to the next three by three 2D
block. That is a three by three block.
So the address of next three by three 2D
block is 1036
So &arr+1 value will
be 1036
Now let us understand about arr. arr is a pointer to
the first 1D array. here 1D array has three
elements, so arr is a pointer of type
(int*)[3] which means arr is a pointer which
points to an array of three integers
So the first row's base address will be stored in
arr
And here first row's base address is 1000
So arr value will be 1000
And since arr is a row pointer if we move
arr by one position it will point to the next
one dimensional row
So what will be arr+1?
It will point to the second row of the 2D
array. So arr+1 will be the base
address of the second row, that is 1012.
Similarly arr+2 will be pointing to third row and
will have the address 1024
Let us understand about *arr.
*arr will point the first element of the 2D array
and it is a pointer of type (int*)
as it is a pointer to a single integer
element
So if we write *arr you will get the
address of the first element of the 2D array
which is 1000 as *arr is a single element
pointer
If we move *arr by one position it will
point to the next element
So *arr+1 will be the address of
next element which is 1004. Similarly *arr+2
will be the address of the next element that
is 1008. Finally **arr will be the
value of the first element. Since *arr holds the
address of the first element
**arr will give the value stored in the
first element
And if we move **arr by one position
that is **arr+1 the value will
be incremented by one
And if the first array element is 10
**arr+1 will be 11
Now let us summarise the concept
Here
&arr is a 2D array pointer that
is (int*)[row][col]
So &arr+1 will point to the next
two dimensional block
Next arr is a 1D pointer, that is
of type (int*)[row]
So arr+1 will point to the
next one dimensional array in the two dimensional array
Next *arr is a single element pointer. ie., of type
(int*) so *arr+1 will point the
next element in the array
And finally **arr is a value of the
first element so **arr+1 will increment
the element value by one. So let us
Connect this with a real time example
If we assume this building as a 2D array
and it has four floors and three houses in each
floor, then &arr will point the entire apartment
that is it will point Building1 and &arr+1
will point the next apartment that is Building2
which also has four floors and three houses in
each floor and &arr+2
will point to the next apartment that
is building3 and arr will point to the first
floor
That is top floor of building1 and arr+1
will point to the next floor and *arr
will point to the first house of this
First floor and *arr+1
will point to its next house and so on
So in a 2D array arr,arr can point
to the whole 2D array and a single row and
a single element also.